                              AI AND ALIFE
       NOTES IN RESPONSE TO A JOURNALIST'S REQUEST FOR AN OVERVIEW

                              Aaron Sloman
                       School of Computer Science
                      The University of Birmingham
                      http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~axs

DRAFT: Comments Welcome
Last updated:
10 Aug 1998
    Added more about needs and niche space and further
    cross-references

20 Dec 1997
    (Added more on trajectories in niche space and
    refs at end to McCarthy & Minsky)

This is one of many half(or less)-baked papers and discussion notes in
    http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~axs/misc/

CONTENTS

 -- WHAT IS ALIFE?
 -- -- AI and Alife abstract away  from details
 -- -- AI and Alife subsume each other
 -- -- . Alife subsumes AI
 -- -- . AI subsumes Alife
 -- -- Silly disputes
 -- TRAJECTORIES IN DESIGN SPACE AND NICHE SPACE
 -- -- Design space
 -- -- Niche space: explicit and implicit niches
 -- -- Changing niches
 -- -- . Niches changed by the individual
 -- -- . Niches defined by the needs of others
 -- -- . Niches changed extraneously
 -- -- . Self-induced niche changes
 -- -- Niches for artificial and social systems
 -- -- Individual trajectories in design space
 -- -- Population trajectories in design space
 -- -- "Repair" trajectories
 -- NATURAL, ARTIFICIAL OR BOTH
 -- -- Modularity aids intelligibility
 -- IS IT REAL LIFE, REAL INTELLIGENCE, REAL CONSCIOUSNESS?
 -- See also:

-- WHAT IS ALIFE?

Alife and AI each can be seen as a superset of the other. I shall
explain why.

AI explores mechanisms and architectures for systems able to perform
many sorts of tasks, including tasks previously performed only by people
and animals. These include perception, learning, planning, problem
solving, language understanding and generation, game playing, artistic
creativity, and many more.

AI investigates the general principles required to explain and model
both how people and animals work and also possible designs for new types
of systems. So the field includes the study of principles relevant to
organisms which have not yet evolved but might evolve in principle and
machines (both hardware and software) which might be developed in the
future.

This includes the study of natural and artificial mechanisms that modify
themselves, through learning, adaptation and development of various
sorts.

Alife extends these studies by exploring ways in which POPULATIONS of
systems with reproductive capabilities can modify themselves. This
includes investigating the dynamics of coexisting, competing and
collaborating populations, and the processes by which successive
generations develop.

-- -- AI and Alife abstract away  from details

In both AI and Alife, the study of general principles involves
abstracting away from various details, for instance:

  o Both ignore the differences between naturally occurring and
    artificially developed systems (e.g. even something without a
    designer can be thought of as a design which could be thought up by
    different possible designers.)

  o Both ignore the differences between different sorts of underlying
    mechanisms (e.g. organic matter vs wires and transistors)

  o Both ignore the differences between materially embodied systems and
    those that exist only as "virtual" or "abstract" machines in
    software systems. (Not all researchers ignore this difference: there
    are some whose focus of interest is only in embodied mechanisms, but
    that is simply one type of focus.)

  o Both ignore the differences between systems that have been directly
    designed and implemented and those that have somehow produced their
    own capabilities by evolving or adapting or learning: if the end
    result is the same we can investigate its properties without
    bothering about differences in origins.

(Note that in this context "virtual" does not contrast with "real" --
virtual machines in computers, e.g. word processors, are real and
perform really useful tasks, including causing physical events to occur
such as displaying and printing formatted pages of text and images.)


-- -- AI and Alife subsume each other

-- -- . Alife subsumes AI
Alife subsumes AI insofar as the processes studied in Alife include the
evolution of various kinds of more or less intelligent systems. So far,
despite much hyperbole in the Alife camp, only extremely simple systems
have been evolved, generally very much simpler than the more
sophisticated systems designed by people working in AI.

However it is to be expected that Alife researchers will go on and study
the evolution of far more complex systems. This will require enormous
amounts of computer power if, for instance, thousands of millions of
years of evolution of multiple coexisting species need to be simulated.

-- -- . AI subsumes Alife

AI subsumes Alife insofar as AI researchers are beginning to explore
ways of including evolutionary mechanisms within a single problem
solving system (e.g. a package that uses genetic algorithms to produce a
design for a circuit).

It seems that something like evolutionary mechanisms are used by our
immune system, which is a kind of problem solving system. So perhaps
other aspects of the development of intelligence in individuals can use
evolutionary mechanisms.

-- -- Silly disputes

This mutual subsumption means that AI and Alife are essentially studying
the same thing, but people in the two research communities have
different viewpoints, different centres of attention.

Many of them are unaware of how their work fits into this broad picture,
so they waste time on silly disputes and pronouncements. E.g. it is not
uncommon for Alife researchers to pronounce AI to be doomed to failure.
This silliness can in part be attributed to blinkered vision, and in
part to the pressures of competition for increasingly scarce research
funds.

Even though each of AI and Alife subsumes the other, the differences in
emphasis, and in level of description are real enough. For instance,
they tend to explore different sorts of trajectories in design space and
niche space, which I'll now explain.

Within each field there are also silly disputes, e.g. within AI there
are silly disputes concerning:

    o the use of logical vs non-logical forms of representation,

    o the use of connectionist vs symbolic mechanisms

    o top-down vs bottom-up or middle out approaches,

    o the use of simplied "toy" worlds vs more complex "realistic"
      problems

    o the development of explicitly designed systems vs development
      of self-modifying systems

It is sometimes not clearly understood that alternative, complementary
approaches are needed if we are to gain a deep understanding of
complementary phenomena.

As the field of Alife develops it will probably also generate a rich
collection of silly internal disputes, including for instance disputes
regarding whether evolutionary mechanisms can produce complex systems
with modular, intelligible designs, or only unstructured messy
solutions to problems.

(For more on silly disputes see Minsky's article listed at the end.)

I turn now to some of the deep features common to both AI and Alife.


-- TRAJECTORIES IN DESIGN SPACE AND NICHE SPACE

Many people study systems that learn, adapt, develop, or evolve across
generations. I see all of these as part of a larger study of possible
"trajectories" in design space and niche space. I'll explain briefly
what these spaces are.

-- -- Design space

"Design space" refers to the class of possible mechanisms and
architectures that can in principle exist, including:

  o *naturally* occurring biological systems, such as plants, many kinds
    of animals, ecosystems

  o *artificially* created, explicitly designed systems such as
    computers, robots, word processors, the internet, office management
    software, social organisations, the united nations, etc.

Design space includes all possible future systems that have not yet
evolved and not yet been thought of by anybody, just as the principles
of geometry apply to all possible shapes including those that have never
been instantiated in physical objects. (That's the main reason why the
general notion of a design does not require designs to have designers,
just as mathematical facts and concepts do not require mathematicians:
many such facts and concepts have not yet been discovered by any
mathematicians, and perhaps some of them never will be. Likewise some
classes of designs.)

In studying *general* principles, we can ignore irrelevant differences
between systems that were explicitly designed by a conscious designer,
systems produced by evolution, and systems that occur by chance.

Two identical systems produced in different ways have the same
properties as far as their inclusion in design space is concerned, even
though people may, for instance, have sentimental attachments to, or
copyright claims on, one and not the other.

-- -- Niche space: explicit and implicit niches

"Niche space" is a more subtle and complex notion derived both from the
biologist's conception of the niche into which a plant or animal fits
and from the engineer's conception of a set of requirements specifying
what a design is for.

Two sorts of insects in the same place can have very different niches
(in the sense used by biologists). So a nich is not a geographical
location but something more abstract: namely what an engineer might call
a collection of requirements and constraints. E.g. for one insect the
niche might involve a requirement be able to locate sources of nectar in
certain plants, while for another it involve a requirement to be able to
catch and eat smaller insects. One may require the ability to fly, and
the other the ability to crawl or climb.

The niches considered by engineers are explicitly described and can be
used to guide and evaluate designs. By contrast, the niches that occur
naturally are implicit in the evolutionary pressures that operate on
evolving species, and generally depend on a combination of:

    o the physical properties of the environment
    o the properties and behaviour of other species that exist in
        that environment
    o each organism's own needs.

-- -- Changing niches

Previously we noted that designs embodied in animals or machines can
change over time, through evolution, or individual development and
learning. Similarly the niches instantiated in a geographical location
can change over time, in different ways.

-- -- . Niches changed by the individual

For an individual organism the niche can change significantly during its
lifetime. For instance if initially it is fed and cared for by adults
and later has to fend for itself, its niche, that is the requirements
that its design must meet, will change. Likewise if an organism has
different needs at different stages in its development, e.g. requiring
different kinds of food or shelter at different times, or if it passes
through one or more phases when it has a drive to mate, or to achieve
supremacy in a group, then its niche changes accordingly.

So some aspects of the niche depend primarily on external opportunities,
dangers, and constraints, while others depend on the organism's needs,
which may develop as the organism's design changes, through innately
programmed development or learning.

(How to define the notion of "an organism's need" is a tricky
philosophical question. Some of the needs may be more realistically
attributed to the gene pool propagated through the organism than to the
organism itself. Some needs make sense only in the context of prior
commitment to design solutions for other needs: e.g. you need a liver
because you already have other design features, not because a liver is
an absolute requirement for any successful organism with your
capabilities. Likewise you may need other things in part because you
have a liver. Needs are justified by circular networks of mutual
support.)


-- -- . Niches defined by the needs of others

In some cases, if the organism is used by something else we can consider
the needs of the USER as also forming part of a niche against which the
organism (and more abstractly the design which it shares with other
similar organisms) can be evaluated.

For example the needs of a farming community or their customers form
part of the niche of cattle and crops, and have played a role in their
evolution, through selective breeding.

Most artificially evolved machines and software systems at present do
not have needs of their own: their niche is defined entirely by
requirements of users. However, in future we can expect increasingly
autonomous agents to develop.

(Some social systems seem to have outlasted the needs they were
originally set up to serve, and have developed to serve their own needs,
not the needs of any of their members.)

-- -- . Niches changed extraneously

Changes in climate, number and type of predators and parasites, amount
and type of available food, availability of locations for nests or
burrows, etc. can all change the requirements on an organism for both
individual survival and successful reproduction.

Thus some changes in niches of organisms arise simply from contingent
changes in the environment which may have nothing specific to do with
those organisms: e.g. they are not produced by users of the organisms.

However, some of the changes in the niche of a class of organisms C may
be produced by reactions of other organisms which prey on or are preyed
on by, or are otherwise affected by members of C. I.e. the design of C
partially determines the niche of another class of organisms C', which
may change to fit that niche better, thereby changing the niche of C,
causing C to change. Such causal changes linking designs and niches may
include both positive and negative feedback loops.

-- -- . Self-induced niche changes

Some intelligent organisms (and some unintelligent ones) may change
their environments in ways that affect their niches. E.g. walking
through a jungle leaving footprints may make it easier for you to find
your way home if you develop the ability to recognize your footprints.

Building shelters for use in very cold weather or developing the ability
to make clothing will alter the requirements for skin covering grown by
an animal.

Not all self-induced niche changes are beneficial: over-grazing may
seriously reduce a food source for instance. More complex and indirect
irreversible effects can also occur, e.g erosion of soil from
over-grazing.

Human self-induced niche changes are the most obvious and spectacular
but there are many examples of different kinds, including an enormous
variety of nest-building capabilities in insects, birds, mammals and
other animals.

-- -- Niches for artificial and social systems

All the remarks about interactions between organisms and their niches
are equally applicable to artificially produced hardware and software
machines, social and political systems, ecosystems, etc.

In other words, a larger structure with a design and a niche may be made
up of smaller systems with their own designs and niches.

Thus all the above developments in niches and designs may occur
simultaneously at different levels within a single complex system.

-- -- Individual trajectories in design space

Because a niche can change during an individual's lifetime many
organisms and artificial systems have designs which allow them to
develop new capabilities, thereby changing their "location" in design
space. Thus there are both naturally occurring and and artificially
produced trajectories in design space.

In biological organisms we have barely begun to understand the variety
of forms of self modification, through many forms of growth, learning,
adaptation, and cultural influences.

Examples are the development of a newly hatched chick into a fully
grown hen, a human infant into an adult, a novice musician to a concert
performer, a bright teenager into an expert mathematician, and the
learning of languages or sporting skills.

(Should we include the development of an egg into a chick? There is no
sharp boundary between the process of production of a new individual
from the genetic material provided by parents and the process of
development of the individual with changing needs. There are also cases
where the niche doesn't change, only the degree of fit: as in the
continuing growth of a tree over many years.)

Thus there is a class of trajectories that an individual can follow
through design space, with corresponding trajectories in niche space.
Call these i-trajectories.

Increasingly, nowadays, there are also artefacts that adapt or learn,
e.g. adaptive plant control systems, information networks that adapt
their routing decisions as loads change, data-mining systems that
develop new forms of classification, interfaces that adapt to users, and
self tuning software for operating systems.

Techniques for doing this in AI include the use of inductive learning,
automatic debugging, neural nets, and various forms of evolutionary
computation. These are all important long term research topics in AI.

-- -- Population trajectories in design space

But not all trajectories in design space are possible for an individual.
An egg that is capable of developing into a chicken or an egg that is
capable of developing into a dinosaur may be incapable of developing
into an eagle or a giraffe, no matter how much the environment is
altered to pressurise it in that direction.

If instead of focusing on individuals we consider POPULATIONS of
individuals with reproductive capabilities then we find a much broader
class of possible trajectories. Biological evolution provides many
examples of trajectories followed by a population across several
generations which cannot be traversed by individuals. Populations rush
in where individuals cannot tread.

We can use "e-trajectories" to refer to trajectories that require
evolution of a population. (An e-trajectory will generally be a little
like a "smeared" trail in design space compared with an i-trajectory.)

The study of these population trajectories is what Alife is primarily
about. It attempts to explore all possible mechanisms by which
populations can change themselves in response to environmental
pressures.

This requires a notion of what makes one individual better than another.
In Darwinian evolution this is simply reproductive fitness, which can be
achieved in different ways by different sorts of organisms.

This can be generalised to include all sorts of fitness measures,
for instance fitness in solving a particular engineering goal, or
winning competitions at agricultural shows or dog shows, using the
simple expedient of letting a researcher or farmer or dog breeder decide
which individuals in each generation are allowed to produce offspring.
In other words, reproductive fitness may be externally manipulated to
guide the evolutionary process. This is why Alife is relevant to
engineering as well as to the study of naturally occurring and
theoretically interesting examples of evolution.

-- -- "Repair" trajectories

Some kinds of changes in an individual's design are not possible for an
individual nor for an evolving population, but are possible if some
external agent intervenes, e.g. by "repairing" a faulty machine or
software system, or organism (perhaps using surgery, or chemical
treatment). For want of a better label let's call the class of
trajectories which are not i-trajectories or e-trajectories but can be
produced by external intervention "r-trajectories".

-- NATURAL, ARTIFICIAL OR BOTH

In both AI and Alife researchers can either restrict themselves to
studying and modelling the naturally occurring mechanisms and processes,
or, as suggested by the use of the word "artificial", they they can
restrict themselves to the study of artificial systems including complex
electronic circuits, software systems, more or less autonomous robots,
etc.

Better still, they can be really broad minded and attempt a
general study, looking for principles that cover both natural and
artificial systems, just as general principles of aerodynamics are
equally relevant to the design of flying insects, birds and aeroplanes.

Sometimes the study of artificial systems may give us clues as to
features of the naturally occurring system that we had not previously
noticed. E.g. my colleague Riccardo Poli works on forms of evolutionary
computing that do not use simple linear structures or tree structures to
represent a genetic specification but rather networks of genetic
material. These can sometimes be far more efficient at solving
particular problems than the simpler bit strings used in genetic
algorithms. Perhaps one day we'll find that natural evolution also uses
"higher level" structures as genetic building blocks, for the same
reasons as engineers do, i.e. to constrain and speed up the search for
good solutions. This is a particular example of the general
investigation of classes of evolutionary mechanisms to find out which
are most efficient at solving problems.

One of the problems in studying very complex systems which have evolved
over thousands of millions of years is whether human minds are capable
of understanding that degree of complexity. Some have argued that we
cannot hope to. I find this an unconvincing form of defeatism, possibly
based in part on a desire to divert resources from those who want to
investigate explicit design techniques.

How might it be possible for human minds to understand very complex
systems produced by evolutionary processes without a designer, including
for instance human brains?

An interesting conjecture is that in order to overcome problems of
searching through combinations too numerous even to be explored in
evolutionary time, the evolutionary system has been forced to use design
principles which are to some extent modular and structured. If so, the
results could turn out to be more intelligible than a huge mish-mash
of tiny components which just happen to work together to produce an
effect.

Thus it is hoped that even if we cannot understand all the fine details
of the structure of any particular brain, or any particular evolutionary
trajectory, there may be large scale developments, at a higher level of
abstraction, that we can understand, and explain, and perhaps one day
model in artificial systems.

-- -- Modularity aids intelligibility

An example might be the development of different architectural layers in
human-like intelligent systems, corresponding to recent ideas emerging
from work in AI and brain science, namely the notion that human like
intelligence depends on at least three different coexisting sub-systems
namely

  o An evolutionarily old reactive system, to be found in many
    animals (including some forms in insects)

  o A more recently evolved deliberative system capable of creating
    internal plans and other complex objects and comparing them and
    selecting them in advance of executing them.

  o A still more recent and rare ability to turn deliberative mechanisms
    inwards and base them on information about internal states and
    processes, including intermediate perceptual processes
    (corresponding to the notion of qualia).

We can use AI techniques to explore the design principles for such
multi-layered systems (as we are doing at Birmingham), and we can
explore the consequences of those layers, e.g. showing how the three
layers generate three different sorts of emotional states, and also how
illusory philosophical problems of consciousness will arise for any
system that has the third layer.

And we can use Alife techniques to investigate how the layers might
evolve (since it is unlikely that fossil records will ever give
sufficient information about the evolution of brain structures and
information processing functionality).

Perhaps by considering what is evolvable we can refine our attempts to
understand what has evolved, and by considering what has evolved we can
refine our attempts to understand the mechanisms and principles of
evolution. I find this synthesis more exciting and challenging than
either the defeatist view that it is all too difficult or the exclusive
view that everything has to be done in a particular way, e.g. either
using explicit design or letting systems design themselves.

-- IS IT REAL LIFE, REAL INTELLIGENCE, REAL CONSCIOUSNESS?

Some people would object to the attempt, in both AI and Alife, to ignore
the differences between the natural and the artificial, or between
physically embodied systems and systems simulated entirely in software.

They would claim that the attempt to find common general principles
linking the natural and the artificial is misguided, because the
artificially produced or evolved will not be the REAL thing, or perhaps
the software-only versions will not be the REAL thing.

It won't be REAL life, REAL intelligence, REAL perception, REAL
planning, REAL consciousness.

Likewise, some claim that a system inhabiting only a virtual machine
environment implemented in software cannot be an example of REAL life,
REAL intelligence, REAL perception, REAL consciousness, etc.

The problem with this sort of objection is that it is based on
dichotomous thinking. The assumption is that we have concepts like
"alive", "conscious" "intelligent" which divide things up into two
classes, those which the concept applies to and those which it doesn't
apply to. So the assumption is that everything either is alive or it
isn't.

This is obviously silly with concepts like "house". A house is something
that has a collection of features that make it a useful enclosure for
its occupants. But there's no well defined subset of those features that
form a minimal requirement for something to be a house, so that
everything that has those features is a house, and everything else
isn't. Rather, "house" is a cluster concept. It corresponds to a cluster
of features which in various combinations can make something a house,
but with no well defined boundary between the cases that are houses and
those that are not, even if there are clear examples of both.

Maybe under some conditions you'd regard a rectangular sheet of metal
supported by four poles as a house, maybe not. Maybe under some
conditions you would call Buckingham palace a house, maybe not. But
arguing about over whether something is a REAL house if it doesn't have
any walls, or any doors, or if it is as big and complex as a palace, is
just silly.

The important thing is not to draw boundaries, but to understand that
there is a large variety of cases with different combinations of
features. We can study the implications of the presence or absence of
various features, without worrying whether they make something a REAL
house or not. We could, if we wish, give them different names, coined
for the purpose of making new distinctions that we have found useful,
e.g. "wallfree-house", "palatial-house", etc.

The same goes for concepts like "alive", "conscious", etc. These are
also cluster concepts, which refer in a partially indeterminate way to
collections of features which can be present or absent in different
combinations.

Some subsets (e.g. the features found in a chicken, or a giraffe)
definitely make something alive and other subsets (e.g. the features of
a rock) definitely don't. But there are many combinations which we have
never previously encountered, and therefore our language has not needed
to take decisions about whether they do or do not suffice for being
alive.

Some of those combinations are found in artificial systems. In
particular, over many years AI researchers have been examining ways of
implementing artificial systems with combinations of various kinds of
abilities, including visual perception, auditory perception, tactile
perception, motor control, learning, planning, remembering, discovering
new concepts, solving mathematical problems, painting pictures,
composing poems and stories, communicating with other natural or
artificial systems, acquiring new goals or interests, emotional
capabilities, and many more.

Arguing over whether such systems, whether they are tangible robot like
entities, or software agents in virtual reality environments, REALLY are
alive or not, REALLY have mental states or not, is a complete waste of
time, for there can be no answer.

But we can explore the implications of having different combinations of
features and, for some combinations that recur often and are of
interest, we can coin new unambiguous names: alive1, alive2, alive3,
conscious1, conscious2, conscious3, etc., just as, when we discovered
that a chemical element such as carbon could have two isotopes we did
not need to waste time arguing over which is REALLY carbon. Instead we
call one carbon12 and the other carbon14 (or whatever), and then study
their similarities and differences.

So instead of arguing over whether the entities studied in Alife, or in
AI, are alive or conscious or intelligent, or worrying about where to
draw the boundaries between those which REALLY are and those which are
not, we can simply note that different more refined versions of our old
indefinite concepts can be defined, with different boundaries.

Then we can explore the implications of each case, e.g. which
regions of niche space it can fit, what the implications of its design
are. And we can go on to explore more global processes in which such
systems interact with one another and either individuallym or in groups,
or across many generations, follow intricate trajectories in design
space and niche space.

This replaces fruitless philosophical (or theological) debates with
productive investigation. Let's get on with the job. There's lots to do.

=======================================================================

-- See also: ----------------------------------------------------------

John McCarthy
    What is Artificial Intelligence?
    http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/whatisai/whatisai.html
    McCarthy shares the view of AI as science, not just engineering,
    but has a more sharply focused range of interests, with an emphasis
    on the use of logic. However, that can be seen as a component of
    the research programme sketched above, not something in opposition
    to it.
    See also his main web page: http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/

Marvin Minsky
    "Logical vs. Analogical or Symbolic vs. Connectionist or Neat vs.
    Scruffy", in Artificial Intelligence at MIT., Expanding
    Frontiers, Patrick H. Winston (Ed.), Vol 1, MIT Press, 1990.
    Reprinted in AI Magazine, 1991
    ftp://ftp.ai.mit.edu/pub/minsky/SymbolicVs.Connectionist.txt

    This is one of many papers by Minsky emphasising the need to combine
    different approaches to the study of mind. See his web page for
    further pointers:
        http://www.ai.mit.edu/~minsky/

I have a loosely relevant, half-baked, still growing paper on the
evolution of consciousness located in the Cognition and Affect project
directory

    ftp://ftp.cs.bham.ac.uk/pub/groups/cog_affect

The paper is in postscript and compresssed postscript format in two
files:
        Sloman.consciousness.evolution.ps
        Sloman.consciousness.evolution.ps.gz

Related mostly DRAFT discussion papers attempt to explain the
connections between the philosopher's concept of "supervenience" and the
engineer's concept of "implementation", and other issues mentioned
above:

ftp://ftp.cs.bham.ac.uk/pub/groups/cog_affect/Sloman_iberamia.ps
    The ``Semantics'' of Evolution: Trajectories and Trade-offs in
    Design Space and Niche Space.

ftp://ftp.cs.bham.ac.uk/pub/groups/cog_affect/Sloman.supervenience.and.implementation.ps
    Supervenience and Implementation: Virtual and Physical Machines

ftp://ftp.cs.bham.ac.uk/pub/groups/cog_affect/Sloman.design.and.niche.spaces.ps
    Design Spaces, Niche Spaces and the ``Hard'' Problem

http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~axs/misc/aiforschools.html
    An introduction to AI for school leavers and careers advisers.

[end]
